- Given that bitcoin, unlike fiat, is voluntarily adopted by its users in every instance, it’s appropriate to be astonished that, despite bitcoin’s short life, it has become a significant global monetary institution, providing a nonstate and nonbank means of wealth storage, as well as an apolitical and neutral transactional medium. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn13wwvgf4yhpvp3bc2gbmwm))
- Bitcoin’s proof of work—whereby bitcoin miners surrender electricity and computational resources to acquire new tokens—establishes a real-world cost for the resource, requiring miners to “buy in” should they want to occupy the position of the mint. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn13xbahz1zynsp916fz1mbf))
- Like bitcoin miners, fiat miners are incentivized to maximize token issuance for themselves. However, unlike bitcoin miners, fiat miners are not constrained by the difficulty adjustment. Thus, fiat mining has no mechanism for controlling issuance, which powerfully explains the accelerating explosion in fiat tokens, country after country, decade after decade. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn13yt76sarpmbwwx2sgn2c1))
- By giving in to the populist clamor for ever more abundant, freely issued fiat tokens, fiat mining cripples the role of the wisest regulator, the market, by removing the most important mechanism for efficient, economy-wide allocation of capital: relative prices of sound (i.e., strictly limited) monetary tokens. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn140y4xnehfv6q1bn834jjz))
- However, bitcoin is also a form of life insurance, though not in the traditional sense of a big payout if you die. Rather, bitcoin provides a big payout while you live, in the form—pricelessly—of personal sovereignty, freedom, and dignity. In a world replete with monetary unfairness, injustice, the institutionalization of moral hazard, and the State’s increasing domestication of our individuality, bitcoin’s incorruptible fairness, justice, truth, and beauty represent a beacon for all optimists who seek personal improvement and peace. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn144c654cvdvf9sxx7bqb1g))
- Perhaps just in time, each global citizen now has a choice. You can stay on the fiat standard, in which some people get to produce unlimited new units of money for free, most likely not you. Or opt in to the bitcoin standard, in which no one gets to do that, including you. With the option, now, of a monetary system governed by rules, not rulers, we can each be grateful for the opportunity, and personal responsibility, of making that choice. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn144v4nw80szsz02jc80kj0))
