#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://www.airr.io/episode/62a68ccaabd8be000e9b9839

---

- Speaker 1: the technical question that my team asked was what is the probability that natural selection would shape sensory systems to see true properties of objective reality? And to our surprise, we found that the answer is precisely zero. Except for one one kind of structure that we can go into if you want to. But for for any generic structure that you might think the world might have a total order topology metric. The probability is precisely zero. That natural selection would shape any sensory system of any organism to see any aspect of objective reality. So, in that sense, what we're seeing is what we need to see to stay alive long enough to reproduce. So in other words, we're seeing what we need to guide adaptive behavior full stop. ([Time 0:08:27](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aac64062ce94f7a9d23512))
- Speaker 1: all I'm saying is that if you take evolution by natural selection seriously, then that is precluded that our perceptions are there. They're there to guide adaptive behavior full stop. They're not there to show you the truth. In fact, the way I think about it is they're there to hide the truth because the truth is too complicated. It's just like if you're trying to, you know, use your laptop to write an email, right? What you're doing is toddling voltages in the computer. But good luck trying to do it that way. That's the reason why we have a user interfaces because we don't want to know that, quote unquote truth. The diodes and resistors and all that terrible hardware. If you had to know all that truth, it would your friends wouldn't hear from you. So you So what evolution gave us was perceptions that guide adaptive behavior. And part of that process that turns out means hiding the truth and giving you, um, uh, eye candy. ([Time 0:15:12](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aac64062ce94f7a9d23515))
- Speaker 1: been that idea that, you know, with neuroscience we have to have in some sense, a top down model of what what's being computed and why that we would then go after the same thing with the trying to reverse engineer a computing system like your laptop. We really would we really need to understand what the user interface is about and why we have what are the keys on the keyboard for and so forth. You need to know why to really understand why all the circuitry and what what it's for. Now we don't evolution of natural selection does not tell us the deeper question that we're asking the answer to the deeper question which is why what what why what what's this deeper reality and what's it up to and why all it tells us is that whatever reality is, it's not what you see, What you see is just ([Time 0:52:02](https://www.airr.io/quote/62ab35f862ce94f7a9e37fd4))
- Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting that you say introspect to the bottom because there there is that there is one mean again, this isn't the same spirit of what I said before, which is it depends on what answer you give to, what's beyond space time. What answer we would give to your question? Right. So but one answer that is interesting to explore is something that spiritual traditions have said for thousands of years, but haven't said precisely, so we can't take it seriously in science until it's made precise, but we might be able to make it precise and that is that they've they've also said something like space and time aren't fundamental. There maya their their illusion. And but that if you look inside, if you don't respect and let go of all of your particular perceptions, you will come to something that's beyond conceptual thought and that is their claim being in contact with the deep ground of being that transcends any particular conceptual understanding, if that is correct and I'm not saying it's correct, but I'm not saying it's not correct. I'm just saying if that's correct, then it would be the case that as scientists because we also are in touch with this ground of being, we would then not be able to conceptually understand ourselves all the way, but we could know ourselves just by being ourselves. And so we would there would be a sense in which there is a fundamental grounding to the whole enterprise because we're not separate from the enterprise. This is the opposite of 3rd, the impersonal third person sci this would make science personal all the way down. And but but nevertheless scientific, because the scientific method would still be what we would use all the way down for the conceptual understanding. 
  Speaker 0: Unfortunately, still don't know if you went all the way down. It's possible that this kind of whatever ([Time 0:55:10](https://www.airr.io/quote/62ab36a862ce94f7a9e39f27))
- Speaker 1: this entity that I call a proton? What is the reality behind it? Well, the physicists are finding these big, big structures Apple to Hedren, associate Hedren. What's behind those? Could be consciousness. What I'm playing with. In which case when I'm interacting with a proton, I could be interacting with consciousness again to be very, very clear because it's easy to miss. I'm not saying a proton is conscious, just like I'm not saying your face is conscious. Your face is a symbol I create and then delete as I look. And so your face is not conscious. But I know that that face in my interface, the lex Friedman face that I create is an interface symbol. That's a genuine portal into your consciousness. The portal is less clear for a cat, even less clear for an ant. And by the time we get down to a proton, the portal is not clear at all. But that doesn't mean I'm not interacting with consciousness. It just means my interface gave up and there's some some deeper reality that we have to go after. So, so ([Time 1:27:16](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed13562ce94f7a96e442a))
- Speaker 0: better to each other. Or is it just as you get more and more complex, you get better and better portals. 
  Speaker 1: Well, let me answer 1 1 aspect of it that that are more confident about then I'll speculate on that. Why is why is it that the portal is so bad with protons? Well, and and elementary particles more generally corks, Lipton's and gluons and so forth. Well, the reason for that is because those are just symmetries of space time. More technically, the irreducible representations of the point craig group. It's best time. So they're just literally representations of the data structure of spacetime that we're using. So that's why they're not very much insightful. They're they're just almost entirely tied to the data structure itself. There's there's not much, they're telling you only something about the data structure not behind the data structure. It's only when we get to higher levels that we're starting to in some sense, build portals to what's behind ([Time 1:28:43](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed13562ce94f7a96e442c))
- Speaker 0: better to each other. Or is it just as you get more and more complex, you get better and better portals. 
  Speaker 1: Well, let me answer 1 1 aspect of it that that are more confident about then I'll speculate on that. Why is why is it that the portal is so bad with protons? Well, and and elementary particles more generally corks, Lipton's and gluons and so forth. Well, the reason for that is because those are just symmetries of space time. More technically, the irreducible representations of the point craig group. It's best time. So they're just literally representations of the data structure of spacetime that we're using. So that's why they're not very much insightful. They're they're just almost entirely tied to the data structure itself. There's there's not much, they're telling you only something about the data structure not behind the data structure. It's only when we get to higher levels that we're starting to in some sense, build portals to what's behind ([Time 1:28:44](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed13562ce94f7a96e442f))
- Speaker 1: ultimately, it's useful for, for theories like thermodynamics and also for understanding brain networks in terms of individual neurons and neurons in terms of chemical systems inside cells. That's all very, very useful. But but the idea that we're getting to the more fundamental nature of reality, no, when you, when you get all the way down in that direction, you get down to the corks and gluons, what you realize is what you've gotten down to is not fundamental reality, just the irreducible representations of a data structure, that's all you've gotten down to. So you're always stuck inside the data structure. So, you seem to be getting closer and closer. I went from neural networks to neurons, to neurons, to chemistry, chemistry, to particles, particles to clerks and gluons. I'm getting closer and closer to the No, I'm getting closer and closer to the actual structure of the data structure of space and time. The irreducible representations, that's what you're getting closer to. Not to a deeper understanding of what's beyond space. Time 
  Speaker 0: will also ([Time 1:41:37](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed0ac62ce94f7a96e335a))
- Speaker 0: But let us return um, your brilliant whirlwind overview of the different theories of consciousness that are out there. Thank you. What is consciousness if outside of space time. 
  Speaker 1: If we think that we want to have a model of consciousness, we as scientists then have to say, what do we want to write down? What what what kind of mathematical modeling were going to write down? Right? And if you think about it, there's lots of things that you might want to write down about. Consciousness was really complicated subject. Um so most of my colleagues are saying, let's start with matter or neurons and and say what properties of matter could create consciousness. But I'm saying that that whole thing is out space time is doomed, That whole thing is out. We need to look at consciousness Qua consciousness in other words, not as something that arises in space and time, but perhaps is something that creates space and time as a data structure. So what do we want? And here again, there's no hard and fast rule. But what you ([Time 1:42:55](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed0e662ce94f7a96e3ae5))
- Speaker 1: it's beyond human consciousness. Human consciousness, from my point of view would be one of a countless variety of consciousnesses. And even within human consciousness, there's there's countless friday of consciousness within us, right? I mean, you have your left and right hemisphere. And apparently if you split the corpus callosum, the personality of the left hemisphere and the religious beliefs of the left hemisphere can be very different from the right hemisphere. And they're conscious experiences can be dis joint, one could have one conscious experience. They can play 20 questions. Left hemisphere can have an idea in his mind and the right time is for us to guess and it might not get it. So, so even within you there, it's it's more than just one consciousness. It's lots of consciousnesses. So, I the general theory of consciousness that I'm after is not just human consciousness, it's going to be just consciousness. And I presume human consciousness is a tiny drop in the bucket of the infinite variety of consciousnesses. 
  Speaker 0: That said, I should clarify ([Time 1:45:54](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed21d62ce94f7a96e641c))
- Speaker 1: neurons, say, or the right kind of artificial intelligence circuitry. How do you boot that up? That's that's typically what the hard problem of consciousness means to researchers notice that I'm changing the problem. I'm not trying to boot up conscious experiences from the dynamics of neurons or silicon or something like that. I'm saying that that's the wrong problem. My heart problem would go in the other direction. If I start with conscious experiences, how do I build up space and time? How do I build up what I call the physical world? How do I build up what we call brains? Because I'm saying consciousness is not something that brains do, brains are something that consciousness makes up. It's ([Time 1:52:57](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed38862ce94f7a96e8dce))
- Speaker 1: you created on the fly as soon as you look away, that's gone. When 
  Speaker 0: you say you you mean human being scientists 
  Speaker 1: right now, that's right. More generally it'll be conscious agents. Because as you pointed out my asking for a theory of conscience only about humans. No, it's it's consciousness which human consciousness is just a tiny sliver. 
  Speaker 0: So but you are saying that there is that's a useful data structure, How many other data structures are there? That's why I said you human if there's another earth, there's another alien civilization in doing these kinds of investigations where they come up with similar data structures, 
  Speaker 1: probably not. 
  Speaker 0: What is the space of data structures I guess is what I'm asking. Um 
  Speaker 1: my guess is that if consciousness is fundamental, consciousness is all there is then the only thing that mathematical structure can be about is possibilities of consciousness. ([Time 1:54:08](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed44d62ce94f7a96ea65b))
- Speaker 1: a vanishingly small fraction of them use space time data structures and the kinds of structures that we use, there's an infinite variety of data structures. Now this is very similar to something that max tech Mark has said, but I want to distinguish it. He has his level for multiverse idea. He he thinks that mathematics is fundamental and and so that's the fundamental reality. And since there's an infinite variety of endless variety of mathematical structures, there's an infinite variety of multiverses. In his view, I'm saying something similar in spirit, but importantly, different. There's an infinite variety of mathematical structures. Absolutely. But mathematics isn't the fundamental reality in this in this framework. Consciousness is in mathematics is to consciousness like bones are to an organism, you need the bones. Some mathematics is not divorced from consciousness, but it's not the entirety of consciousness by any means. And so there's an infinite ([Time 1:55:14](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aed47f62ce94f7a96eaeb6))
- Speaker 1: so every person that I see, that symbol that I see, the body that I see is is a portal potentially for me to interact with with the consciousness and and each consciousness has a unique character and we call it personality and so forth. So, with each new kid that's born, we come in contact with a personality that we've never seen before. And and a version of consciousness that we've never seen before at a deeper level. As I said, the theory says, there's one agent. So this is a different projection Of that one agent. But but so that's what I mean by a portal is within my own interface, My own projection. Can I see other projections of that one consciousness. So, can I get portals in in that sense? And I Mhm. So I think I think we will get a theory of that, that we will get a theory of of portals and then we can ask how the psychedelics are acting, Are they actually creating new portals or not? If they're not, we should nevertheless then understand how we could create a new portal. Right? Maybe we have to just study what happens when we make, when we have kids. We know that that technology creates new portals, so we have to reverse engineer that and then say, okay, could we somehow create new portals? De novo ([Time 2:34:30](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aee17862ce94f7a9704286))
- Speaker 1: what I am. All the stuff that I thought I was is something that I create on the fly and delete. So this so this is completely radical restructuring of how we think about possessions, about identity, about survival of death and and and so forth. This is completely transformative. But the nice thing is that this whole approach of conversations, unlike the spiritual traditions which have said in some cases, similar things, they said it in precisely this is mathematics. We can actually now begin to state precisely. Here's the mathematical model of consciousness, conscious agents. Here's how it maps onto space time, which I should sketch really briefly. And here's why um things are ephemeral and here's why you shouldn't be worried about the ephemeral nature of things because you're not a little tiny entity inside space and time quite the opposite. You're the author of space and time, ([Time 2:47:54](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aee54562ce94f7a970b813))
- Speaker 0: in the sunset, you're not being intellectual, you're but you're still experiencing it. So it's when you turn on the like the introspective machine, that's when you can start 
  Speaker 1: and turn off the thinker when I actually just start looking without thinking. So that's that's when I feel like I all of a sudden I'm starting to see through, sort of like, okay, part of, part of the addiction to the interface is all the stories I'm telling about. It's really important for me to get that really important to do that. So I'm telling all these stories and so I'm all wrapped up almost all of the mind stuff that's going on in my head is about attachment to the interface. And so what I found is that the essentially the only way to really detached from the interface is to literally let go of thoughts altogether. ([Time 3:01:37](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aee7ad62ce94f7a9710ead))
- Speaker 1: a love in the sense that I'm not different from that I, you know, Yeah, if you and I are separate then then there's I can fight you. But if you and I are the same, if there's a union there, 
  Speaker 0: the togetherness of what, what, who's God? All those gods. The stories have been told throughout history, you said through the spiritual traditions. What do you think that is, is that us trying to find that common thing at the core? Oh, 
  Speaker 1: well, in in in many traditions, not all The one I was raised in. So my dad was a protestant minister. We tend to think of God as a being, but I think that that's not right. I think the closest way to think about God is being period, not a being, but being the very ground of being itself is God. I think that's ([Time 3:14:05](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aef51962ce94f7a972e43c))
- Speaker 1: and then there's experiences where forms that come out of being. That's one deep deep mystery and the question that you asked, what is it all about? Somehow it's related to that? Why does being why don't you just stay without any forms? Why does it why do we have experiences? Why should why why not just have when you close your eyes and pay attention to what's behind you? There's nothing but there's being why why don't we just stop there? Why didn't we just stop there? Why did we create all tables and chairs in the sun and moon and and people that all this really complicated stuff why and all I can guess right now and I'll probably kick myself in a couple of years and say that was dumb. But but all I can guess right now is that somehow consciousness wakes up to itself by knowing what it's not. ([Time 3:19:52](https://www.airr.io/quote/62aef51962ce94f7a972e43e))
