#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://www.airr.io/episode/617f852837ea72000ff4e2e1

---

- Speaker 0: and longer, which is why typically we need more of a drug or more potent forms over time to get the same effect. And furthermore what can end up happening is our our balances can kind of get stuck on the pain side where we end up, I like to think of it as these neural adaptation. Gremlins hopping on the pain side of our balance, kind of camping out there. If we bombard our brains with so much dopamine that our brains have to compensate by way down regulating our own dopamine production and transmission, then we end up in this chronic dopamine deficit state where nothing else is enjoyable. We're only focused on our drug of choice. We need to keep using, not to feel good, but just to restore a level balance and feel normal. And when we're not using our drug were experiencing the universal symptoms of withdrawal from any addictive substance which are anxiety, irritability, insomnia depression and craving. 
  Speaker 1: What is the sensation of dopamine, how would you describe what it feels ([Time 0:06:27](https://www.airr.io/quote/62e8fc7e3b9b71cdbd3158c7))
- Speaker 0: deficit state. It it lasts longer, it goes further down. So a person with chronic pain has to experience that pain below even beyond their baseline pain before returning to their baseline pain. So in other words, there's no free lunch, what goes up must come down. And if you start out in chronic pain, you're also subject to the same problems of tolerance, needing more and more to get the same effect and the dependence and withdrawal, which are essentially this opening deficit state. 
  Speaker 1: It's a vicious asymmetry. The fact that you need more and more to gain less and less pleasure, but the more and more will incur an even larger power law return of depression and feeling bad on the other side. 
  Speaker 0: That's exactly right. I ([Time 0:12:20](https://www.airr.io/quote/62e8fda73b9b71cdbd31838f))
- Speaker 0: side of the balance so that you don't end up in that dopamine deficit state. What else 
  Speaker 1: should people do? Let's say that someone wants to do a good dopamine detox other than abstaining from whatever the behavior or the drug is that there currently addicted to, what else do you advise them to do during that period? 
  Speaker 0: Well you have to also be aware of triggers. Um and also eliminate those triggers. So if you're somebody who's addicted to video games like a patient of mine and you find that once you go on youtube and you start watching other people play video games, you're more likely to play a video game yourself then you should probably eliminate youtube for that month. If you're somebody who's trying to quit smoking cigarettes and you find if you have a casual drink with friends, you really want to smoke a cigarette, you should probably eliminate alcohol for that month as well. And from the perspective of neuroscience, that makes a lot of sense because we don't just get a release of dopamine with our drug of choice. We also get a release of dopamine with any reminder of our drug of choice. So for example, my patient addicted to video games when he watches other people play video games ([Time 0:26:33](https://www.airr.io/quote/62e902973b9b71cdbd3244b9))
