#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://www.airr.io/episode/62e68b05e651d4000dba3091

---

- Speaker 0: belief is that when we're when we seemingly are branching out from the, you know, the zeitgeist of the collective, we're actually not. We're branching out into something, we've seen something that fits us in terms of our neurology. Uh, but it's not, it's not this idea of, you know, individuality, I believe that human beings are relational beings. And the one of the reasons there's so many mental health struggles right now is that uh, we we think somehow that we're not and we think somehow that thing's money stuff can can fill that part of us that is relational, which is one of the reasons I believe that um, libertarianism is a, you know, I know, I'm going to incur the wrath of some of your audience, but I'm not so sure that Bitcoin is a libertarian construct. I think it's a communitarian construct. ([Time 0:16:29](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf6724a3775852272b99d))
- Speaker 0: of some of your audience, but I'm not so sure that Bitcoin is a libertarian construct. I think it's a communitarian construct. Small communities who are working towards the benefit of each other, which is what the network is, right. We want more and more people to be part of the network because that strengthens the network, hoarding Bitcoin is antithetical to its strength and its success. Um so I'm not sure. 
  Speaker 1: Can you expand on that holding Bitcoin? Why is antithetical to it? 
  Speaker 0: Because if someone, if someone in our country or an individual collects more and more Bitcoin, the network is inherently weakened because the network is strengthened by the more nodes there are that are validating transactions, the more people who are who are participating in this, not only as an asset class does it seemingly become more valuable but as a relational construct. So, are 
  Speaker 1: you talking here ([Time 0:17:21](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf6724a3775852272b9ab))
- Speaker 1: it? 
  Speaker 0: Because if someone, if someone in our country or an individual collects more and more Bitcoin, the network is inherently weakened because the network is strengthened by the more nodes there are that are validating transactions, the more people who are who are participating in this, not only as an asset class does it seemingly become more valuable but as a relational construct. So, are 
  Speaker 1: you talking here about distribution of coins rather than or you're talking about the movement of coins and being used as a medium of exchange? 
  Speaker 0: I think distribution more than a medium of exchange. 
  Speaker 1: So when Michael say that has 120,000 Bitcoin, uh That is a large concentration. The network stronger if there were 120,000 people, only one Bitcoin each. Absolutes, I can agree with that, but I don't know if it's a zero sum game. Okay. 
  Speaker 0: Yeah. I mean, I'm not ([Time 0:17:53](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf6724a3775852272b9b6))
- Speaker 0: that, you know, like Michael Saylor says, you know, it's going to be digital real estate, this is going to be your, you know, your block on on Madison Avenue. I don't look at it like that either. I see it as this thing that we don't totally understand. And yet if we had a monetary system or a system of information exchange, a system of sharing information and transacting that was absolutely inviolable and that we could, we could trust because it's being verified by the millions and millions of nodes that are then all of a sudden that relational aspect heals us. We're no longer in this this frenzy of following the collective toward the cliff and in this case, I mean, trying to make as much money as we possibly can and use that money as a way to experience the world. 
  Speaker 1: So you think the issue here is ([Time 0:19:05](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf4884a37758522727bad))
- Speaker 0: static again, like when I say a home, a static sort of place as a collective and as individuals we are um stimulated in in a certain way. And 300 years ago that baseline was different than it is now, 300 years ago, somebody could go off into the woods and go bobcat hunting and that would that would meet their need for adrenaline and dopamine, that would meet their sort of stimulatory needs 300 years later, trillion ares need to fly to, you know, fly out into outer space. Um so my belief is that it's not so much the accumulation of stuff, it's the need for stimulation, The need for adrenaline, the need for dopamine, the need for this, this physiological experience. And we're building, we've built over generations and centuries a tolerance. 
  Speaker 1: Oh, I see what you're saying. Okay, ([Time 0:20:51](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf52a4a3775852272936a))
- Speaker 1: all these steps 
  Speaker 0: and it doesn't, you know, I'm I'm not a big fan of what's his name? Glenn beck, you know, again, your audience uh probably will roll their eyes when I say I'm liberal left, when it comes to sort of ideology. I'm not libertarian and I'm not conservative, right. Um there's a guy named Glenn Beck, who does, he used to do a conservative talk 
  Speaker 1: show, 
  Speaker 0: not my favorite guy, whatever. Um, And he talked about one Christmas that he bought everything he possibly could that his kids wanted. He said it was the worst christmas ever. And I was like, I like you more and like in quotation marks, I think that we we can create narrative and story around the fact that if we just have all these things, it will make us happy. But in the end, the I would argue the only thing that makes us happy is relationship. We are Bitcoin fosters relational wealth, above and ([Time 0:23:34](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf5a64a3775852272a28a))
- Speaker 0: you know making gold coins of equal weight and value and holding them in their vaults were issuing paper against their gold coins like receipts and then they started issuing more paper not only against their gold coins, but against, you know, the people who were renting out space in their vaults and then they said, well we can issue paper against ship that doesn't even exist. And that was credit. That was the beginning of in my analysis credit and the extension of credit. Now of course, you know, there were situations where people would go and say we all want our gold back and then there would be a run on the, you know, the vault of the bank because this is the beginning of fractional reserve banking. And I think that it was at that point that we started to we call it progress right? We say. And now we struck out across the world and we found new places and we created new technologies and there was an industrial revolution which in many ways was disastrous. I mean the impact of of the industrial revolution ([Time 0:26:47](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf6224a3775852272aff1))
- Speaker 0: you. The proliferation of diseases is a new new diseases that you know kind of emerge and you're watching this, you're watching your Children suffer, you're watching your friends suffer and your body is going into contortions neurologically. And then my thesis is that this builds and builds and builds and it continues to build because we continue to issue more and more credit and up the ante incrementally for how we move through the world as a species. A lot of it based on how we need to be stimulated. No longer was it good enough to um make a certain amount of money if you were a business tycoon, you had to make more and then you had to build a bigger mansion in Newport Rhode island and it was just on and on and on. And then that kind of got built into us. We became our our sympathetic nervous systems over time became highly attuned to higher and higher levels of stimulation. 
  Speaker 1: How does ([Time 0:28:07](https://www.airr.io/quote/62edf65c4a3775852272b70b))
