#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://youtube.com/watch?v=chKZ5BVxTfY

---

- > Skin in the game is about symmetry. If you're able to reap the benefits of a positive outcome of an event, you must also share the harm and pay a penalty if something goes wrong. This risk shouldn't be possible to transfer to others. ([Time 0:01:32](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5a970631d1700099bb79c))
- > Skin in the game is like the ultimate BS-detector. It allows us to judge the reliability of knowledge or certain advice. It's also about symmetry in human affairs. Those that do not take risks should never be involved in making decisions. ([Time 0:02:29](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5a9c5631d1700099bb79d))
- > When there is a minority that really can't compromise, the flexible majority will adopt to the preferences of the minority. For instance: A person who's allergic to peanuts won't board a plane with peanuts on it. A person who isn't allergic to peanuts, on the other hand, can board a plane filled with peanuts. But he doesn't really mind boarding one which is peanut free either. Simply put, the most intolerant wins. ([Time 0:03:34](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5aa7d5280b100093778bc))
- > Take for example hiring a contractor, which is the equivalent of renting, versus hiring an employee, which is the equivalent of owning. Sure, the contractor might be cheaper to have at times when your business isn't doing much business, but the contractor is not as reliable as an employee. An employee has his reputation and typically his only stream of income on the line if he doesn't show dependability towards you as the employer. Clearly, an employee has more skin in the game than the contractor. Also, employees are often more of the risk-averse type than self-employed contractors. Submissive dogs, rather than disobedient wolves. ([Time 0:06:05](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5ab0a9fb2f70009980574))
- > Inequality vs inequality Although I've talked about the importance of not resenting rich people before, if you want to be a rich yourself one day, I want to ask you this question: Which group of people would you strip of their riches if you could? Group A: the entrepreneur, the musician, the football pro. Group B: the banker, the bureaucrat, the chief executive (who wears a tie). Chances are that you tolerate the inequalities associated with Group A, but resent the rich people from Group B. Why? Because the rich people of Group B, appears to be persons just like you, with the exception that they have probably played the system and acquired privileges that aren't warranted for their positions. It has been shown in studies that Americans are more prone to resent people who got rich from salaries rather than those who made it through entrepreneurial endeavors. Nassim Taleb suggests that what people resent, or at least what they should resent, is individuals at the top without skin in the game. ([Time 0:06:50](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5abb0c3ea280009aae352))
- > Here's another interesting take on inequality - would you say that this is a country with a lot of inequality? Well, the answer is that there isn't enough information provided in the question to decide that. What if the life expectancy in this country is 100 years, and what if every person gets to spend one year per lifetime in the top 1%, and 99 years in the bottom part? Not so unequal anymore, right? Consider that about 10% of Americans will spend at least one year in the top 1% of earners, and that more than 50% will spend one in the top 10%. Equality is not created only by raising the level of people at the bottom, but rather by creating a dynamic system where the rich can rotate. Anyone who puts in the time and effort should be helped by the system to reach the top, and the inverse should also apply. Anyone who's at the top but isn't contributing any more, should face the risk of losing his position in the top 1%. ([Time 0:08:34](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5abe2c3ea280009aae353))
- > For something to be ergodic, there can't be an absorbing barrier, which means something that is irreversible. ([Time 0:10:56](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5ac5a77e0fa000a456b62))
- > In other words, you've hit an absorbing barrier - you can't play the game any longer. Confusion arises regarding ergodicity, because it may seem that, since a "one-off" risk is reasonable, an additional "one-off" after that is reasonable too. At the roulette table, for instance, It comes to us naturally that this is not the case. If we keep trying to double the money we've earned, we will eventually go broke. In real life, it can be stealthier. Eating a bag of potato chips isn't too bad, if you do it every once in a while, but doing it consistently, every day, for many years, will make it so that you face the risk of meeting an absorbing barrier - through your own death by cardiovascular disease. ([Time 0:11:32](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5ac9b77e0fa000a456b63))
- > Skin in the game for the passive investor. When it comes to financial advice, this is a good starting point: "Don't tell me what you think!" "Just tell me what's in your portfolio." ([Time 0:13:57](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5acf277e0fa000a456b64))
- > Make sure that the money manager has skin in the game in that he or she is allowed to reap the benefits of a positive outcome, but has to pay the price in the case of a negative outcome too. The world's greatest investor, Warren Buffett, applied this when he formed his first investing partnership, "Buffett Associates". The deal was that he would gain half the upside above a 4% gain, but pay a quarter of the downside to his partners. ([Time 0:14:40](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5ad0951f7f0000977d058))
- > Skin in the game for the active investor. It's said that "nobody washes a rental car". Without true skin in the game, you cannot be sure that the executives of a company you own are acting in your best interest. So, a rule of thumb for every long-term investor is to look for companies in which the top management of the firm are also some of the largest shareholders. ([Time 0:15:09](https://annotate.tv/watch/62c59f7f2c586700092b6d6d?annotationId=62c5ad1f51f7f0000977d059))
