#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://youtube.com/watch?v=_Q23wwyksdY

---

- > the more you go through neoclassical economics, the more you get used to accepting what they call simplifying assumptions, which are actually fantasies. If you become rapidly oriented around maintaining that paradigm, that way of looking at the world, then you'll get to something like this and just accept it. I've seen plenty of examples of that since then, when I've shown both extremes neoclassical at one extreme, Marxist's at the other. I've shown them logical flaws in their arguments, either developed by me or developed by other 06:30people and they'll just throw their hands out. Oh, it doesn't matter. We can assume our way around that problem. Steve Keen: This is really a human flaw. You become wedded to the way in which you view the world, more than the world itself. When you face a contradiction between it, for most people, they'll turn their eyes from the contradiction. ([Time 0:06:03](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed53073c88c200092a8dfd))
- > the easiest way to say, if you think in terms of supply and demand curves, you're a neoclassical economist. This goes right back to Alfred Marshall back in the 1800s and early 1900s. It's a vision of economy as a self equilibrating system, which will, given left alone to its own devices, it will reach a situation where producers and consumers become as well off as they can be, subject to the constraints of their own income, where people earn their 08:00marginal product and under therefore paid fairly. It's a vision of an equilibrium system, which disturbed from equilibrium will return to that equilibrium. It's sees capitalist society as a means to maximize people's welfare, subject to the constraints of their income, which as I've said, is fairly distributed. That's the vision. When you look at it from this point, from a political science point of view, it's a vision of a self-managing, anarchist society. ([Time 0:07:32](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed53607ffd5400098a9ec6))
- > what are the core flaws that you've discovered in the main macroeconomic explanations of our economies? Steve Keen: Well, I might actually go back to micro to start to answer that question, because these days macroeconomics has become applied micro. 09:30Dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium models and real business cycle models, which are the ones that dominate, the former much more so than the latter, dominate how neoclassical economists think about the economy today. They are all models which are derived from the idea that you should be able to start from the concept of a utility maximizing individual and a profit maximizing firm, and derive your macroeconomics from all the optimization behaviors that are supposed to rule, both consumers, and producers at the micro level. 10:00They will often reason as if the entire economy is a single, utility maximizing individual who works in the factory that he owns for a wage rate set by his marginal products and invests for an indefinite future for an infinitely long lived dynasty. Again, that's a caricature, but that is, again, a summary of what you can find, is the way they think. Their macro is applied micro. The problem is all the micro is wrong. ([Time 0:09:12](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed53ea7ffd5400098a9ec7))
- > To me, the micro completely misses who we 10:30are as biological animals. We can't just parse everything of value in the human experience into utility and assume that it will somehow be Pareto optimal, because utility in our current economy is another deep dish pizza for a 400 pound person, plus a six pack of beer. Whereas, other people in Africa and other places are starving, number one. Number two is we are not self interested. 11:00We are, to an extent, but we're very other regarding. When you smile at a baby human, the baby human will smile back at you. We deeply evolved in a tribal, group setting. How we care about others is not part of the equations. ([Time 0:10:29](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed54177ffd5400098a9ec8))
- > Even if it was, they're still wrong. This is the point that I emphasize in my debunking economics. I'll start from the point, which will when I'm writing the third edition, it's where I'll start. 11:30That's the theory of supply. Because in the theory of supply, which it says, given a certain price, how many units will be provided to the market by the firms, in an industry. Again, that's supposed to be set by profit maximizing behavior by the individual firms. What they're supposed to experience, according to the theory, is as they increase output, they are buying factor inputs, labor, and capital at the same price. But they've got a fixed number of machines, are adding more and more labor to those machines, and each new worker adds more output, but at a lesser amount than the previous worker. 12:00Steve Keen: What that means is you're paying a constant wage, you are getting less productivity per person out of each additional worker you hire so you have diminishing marginal productivity. What that translates to is rising, marginal cost. That is the foundation of the supply curve. Now, every empirical survey that has ever been done, of the actual cost structures of actual firms, finds their marginal costs are falling. 12:30Constant or falling. The very last time that was done on a grand scale was actually by leading conservative economist Alan Blinder, who has been deputy president of the America Economic Association, he's been a vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, so absolutely impeccable orthodox credentials. Steve Keen: He did a survey, what he called, asking about prices, where he surveyed when he did the numbers, 15% of America's manufacturing sector. That's a pretty good survey. His conclusion was, and I'll quote from his book, "The overwhelmingly bad news here (for 13:00economic theory) is that the vast majority of the manufacturing goods are produced under conditions of falling marginal cost." Now, what does his textbook say? This guy wrote a textbook 15 years later, he talks about diminishing marginal productivity and rising marginal costs and completely ignores his own research. The reason is, if you have falling marginal cost, then marginal cost is below average cost and therefore, there is no segment of the supply marginal cost curve above average 13:30cost, which is called the supply curve. The very foundation of the theory empirically falls. You'd find the same thing in demand. Everything about the theory is unsound. ([Time 0:11:19](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed54913c88c200092a8dfe))
- > it implies, first of all, they don't maximize profit by equating marginal cost and marginal revenue, which is the litany 14:00they get toward in first year microeconomics. Because if they do, their price will be below average cost and they'll lose money. What firms actually do, rather than choosing a profit maximizing output level, they try to flog as many units as they can, because in a competitive industry, the more units you sell, the more profit you make. Your average costs are falling as your output level rises. This is an explanation for large firms evolving and for the competitive behavior of firms, where they always try to sell as many units as they can. 14:30Steve Keen: If the neoclassicals were right, the main job of a marketing manager would be to sell stuff. Stop selling. We've reached the point where marginal cost exceeds the marginal revenue. Okay? Now, no sales manager who says, "Stop producing output and stop selling," would keep his job for a nanosecond in American capitalism, because it's a completely false guise as to how you actually maximize profits. You maximize profits by selling as many units as you can. Steve Keen: The behavior of firms is different. 15:00It can't be doing this equilibrating of marginal utility against marginal costs that can't comply. The demand curve can't be derived. The market demand curve doesn't exist in the shape that they draw in the textbooks. That's been proved by logical arguments by near classical economists. The whole thing is a belief system, which has undermined itself using mathematics and empirical research, but they continue pumping it out there because it's a vision to them of the perfect society. ([Time 0:13:56](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed55701673db00098c072d))
- > Product differentiation and innovation is the way you compete, not by price so much. What you'll get is you'll get a dominant firm in the industry. Then that sets up a target for other firms to move into that industry. Throughout, the form of competition is one over innovation, product differentiation, not over price. ([Time 0:16:04](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed55c61673db00098c072e))
- > That's the real dilemma, is that if we had realistic economics, which actually understood the relationship between the economy and the physical biosphere, we would never have got into the severe situation we are in now where we could be on the brink of a collapse in the capacity of the biosphere to support our sedentary civilizations. ([Time 0:17:39](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed566c1673db00098c072f))
- > If you go back 40 years, economists used to use what they call computable general equilibrium models at their core, they had an input output matrix. As part of the input-output matrix, you had the other industrial sectors, which were inputs to your own industrial sector. You also had raw materials turning up there. So before the so-called rational expectations revolution, there was a tendency to see equilibrium 19:00as being the result today of the interaction of numerous input-output dynamics and markups and product prices to give you an equilibrium at a point in time. Steve Keen: Then what they went through is this, what they call, intertemporal equilibrium. What took over there were Cobb–Douglas production functions and what they call constant elasticity of substitution production functions. The Cobb–Douglas is the pure form of it, where there's a high substitutability. 19:30That says that output is technology, which they use the symbol A for, times labor, times capital where labor and capital are both raised to powers, so that if you double all imports, all labor and all capital, you'll double output. In its own way, that's a reasonable, that's a reasonable assumption. Okay? But the exponents for labor and capital are derived from marginal productivity theory, which says that the wage of the worker is the marginal product of labor and the rate of profit on capital is the marginal product of capital. 20:00So that your values for those exponents reflect the wage, the income share of workers into the GDP and the income share in capital. The share for labor tends to be 0.7. The share for capital tends to be 0.3. That's just the arbitrary numbers they've stuck with from what income distribution was roughly in the sixties. Steve Keen: Now, there's no role for energy there. When they tack in energy, what they'll do is add it onto another factor. They say, "Well, all the exponents still have to sum to 1. 20:30The contribution of energy is about three or 4% of GDP, so the exponent of energy is 0.03 or 0.04." There's a brand new paper actually by Rudy Bachmann and a few others, it's a working paper, but what it does is apply neoclassical theory to say what would happen to Germany if Russian embargo and energy, reduced energy input by 10%. Now, according to standard Cobb–Douglas production theory, a 10% fall in the energy 21:00input to German industry would reduce German GDP by 0.4%. When they use the high substitution, they'll say it might reduce it by 2%, but in other words energy is pretty irrelevant. Steve Keen: My contribution on this theory was just the simple insight, labor without energy is a corpse. Capital with that energy is a sculpture. Energy is not an independent factor of production that you throw into a factor with labor and capital. Energy is an input to labor and an input to capital, without which they can do no work. 21:30When you do that, just at the very simple level, even using the same exponents they do, the exponent for energy is 10 times the exponent they use rather than being 0.03 it's 0.3. The same of capital. Energy is much more significant than they realize. Then when you try to look at the empirical data, you find that in fact, the relationship between energy and GDP, or change in energy and change in GDP, is one for one. If there's a 10% fall in energy, there will be a 10% fall in GDP. 22:00Their theory trivializes the importance of the major factor of production, which is energy. ([Time 0:18:41](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed570f1673db00098c0730))
- > You, and I think the factor relationship of energy to GDP is 0.99 or 1, whereas a neoclassical economist would think it's 0.03 or 0.04. 23:00These are two worldviews with a planet with 8 billion people, CO2 420 parts per million, collapsing ecosystems, no plan for the future, other than continued economic growth. I think it's a pretty major assumption differential between those two world views. ([Time 0:22:48](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed57f01673db00098c0731))
- > When you look at the amount of energy you and I consume, it's enormous compared to what a Roman slave would consume. But the amount of our energy we actually put into manufacturing is trivial. Whereas, of course, back in the Roman slaves day, virtually all the energy they got in was the output they'd have to provide to the slave owner. That's about a hundred Watts per person, but machinery gone up radically. 24:00That, of course is where our productivity has come from, the increased amount of energy harnessed per machine over time, but of course that means waste. Steve Keen: If we had that framework, we would never allow the level of energy consumption to reach the level it is, because with the level of waste production, we'd also be acknowledging that. Of course, that's again, absent from mainstreaming thinking. ([Time 0:23:44](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed58424e937a000997b8d4))
- > Any sixth grader or ninth grader or 12th grader or college student could be listening to this 24:30conversation and they could, in five minutes, on their own, from a credible source, find out on the internet that a barrel of oil is 5.7 million British thermal units worth of energy potential. If you translate that to work, 1,760 kilowatt hours of work. Where you and I, digging ditches or hauling manure, or building a house generate around 25:000.6 kilowatt hours worth of energy in a day. Meaning without any conversion factors, a barrel of oil is 11 years worth of work potential. If you handicap it, because humans are more efficient at directing their energy, it's four or five years of work. Yet, we pay a hundred dollars for it and the average laborer in the United States makes $50,000 a year, yet we're generating four or five years of that person's physical labor 25:30from this barrel of oil that all we do is pay for the cost of extraction, not the cost of creation, nor the pollution. How does an economist not see and understand what I just said? Steve Keen: Because they have a nonphysical view of the economy. It's all stuff you can write on a whiteboard when you have terms, labor and capital and ... But energy's not one of the terms they even look at. It's a mindset that I trace right back to Adam Smith, in fact. 26:00Because if you go before Smith, you'll find you had the physiocrats. The physiocrats, Quesnay, Cantillon, there's quite a few others, they argue that all wealth comes from the soil, but what they fundamentally meant was all wealth comes from the sun. If you imagine you're at the Aquacultural Society of France, which was the main location that developed the physiocratic theory, you plant one, one seed corn, you get a thousand 26:30pieces of corn back and if you simply sit there and watch it'll happen over time, even if you barely do anything with the soil. Steve Keen: This became obvious to them that what was causing the wealth in human societies, what they literally call the free gift of nature. Now, in that sense, the free gift of nature that predates the understanding we have at the laws of the conservation of energy. They're aware of it. They're saying, "We're simply exploiting energy we find in the universe, turning it into useful work." Then along comes Smith and says, "Oh ... " Living in Scotland, industrial, hardly agricultural 27:00Scotland, he couldn't accept that land was the source of value. He said, "Labor is the source of value." You then had the classical school of thought coming along. Steve Keen: Now Marx then took over and said labor is the only source of value. Therefore, labor should get the entire rate of profit. The neoclassicals come along and say, "No, both labor and capital contribute to output. Labor gets its marginal product and capital gets its marginal product and that's all just." 27:30We've wasted 250 years arguing about the wrong stuff. The physiocrats rights were right. We only have an advanced economy because we exploit free energy and all we're paying is the cost of extraction and therefore those enormous differentials you mentioned earlier come about. ([Time 0:24:29](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed58f24fecc70009a2eafa))
- > They were right that our wealth comes from the sun or the soil. Had we grown very slowly, decade by decade, instead of this moonshot that ensued, maybe 28:00we would've recognized fossil carbon and hydrocarbons as an extension of ancient sunlight that were buried under the soil. Please tell me what happened. I think we grew so fast and so high that there was this tendency, or direction to attribute some of this largesse to human creativity and technology, because they didn't understand the math of these fossil armies that came out of the ground to support our economies. 28:30How did economic models evolve into the biophysically delusional ones we have today? ([Time 0:27:47](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5971de2e040009f7f896))
- > Largely, because it became part of the ideology of the contest between workers and capitalists over the distribution of income. When Marx turned the classical school, the labor theory of value against capitalism, then in the 1870s, that was when neoclassical economics, which came out, which said, "No, it's the marginal productivity that determines the income, both factors of production, labor, 29:00and capital get what they deserve." The whole thing was seen well, productivity is coming out of three elements; labor, capital, and technology. When they tried to then quantify that, and this is probably in the 1950s and sixties with Robert Solow, they have what they called the Solow residual, that when they look how change in GDP comes about, it had very little relationship with change in labor or change in capital, but what came is change in technology. This A term which was undifferentiated became the magic source that enabled growth to occur 29:30over time. When you asked economists about it they say that's human ingenuity. Yes, there is ingenuity there, but if it wasn't fossil fuels to harness, we wouldn't be producing this volume of output. ([Time 0:28:39](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed59bdde2e040009f7f898))
- > what the economist call the technology component is actually 31:00the exergy, the energy useful work done by the representative machine of a particular time. Steve Keen: If you go back to James Watson's steam engine, then the energy was coal. It was about nine tons a day was consumed by the average machine, about 30% efficiency. You've fast forward to today, it's 10 tons of kerosene per second, passing through a Falcon nine and the efficiency's a bit higher, maybe about 0.4, 0.45, but fundamentally that 31:30technology term can be reseen as the useful energy derived from a machine. That's where our wealth has come from. ([Time 0:30:55](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5a472637480009fc284e))
- > technology is a vector for more energy use, and we do improve and innovate, but it's all predicated on a growing amount of energy and a cheap amount of energy. ([Time 0:31:44](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5a72de2e040009f7f899))
- > What would a model that uses a biophysical underpinning look like on the energy and climate aspects, from your perspective? 39:00Steve Keen: Well, the first thing is that you have to have energy and matter as and input to the production system. If you don't have energy and matter going in, you don't have goods coming out the other end. You therefore have both physical constraints, the energy has to be available, the energy return and energy investment has to be enough for you to actually get a net energy boost out of your mining of energy. You necessarily generate waste out of the production. Waste gets put back into the biosphere and then will undermine the productivity of the biosphere. 39:30That's the basic starting point. I've done the mathematics for that, with working with Matheus Grasselli and Tim Garrett. We've done a set of models of a pure energy economy and then energy plus matter economy to show those interrelationships. That's actually your very starting point. There's no output without biophysical input. Energy is absolutely crucial, is the input without which nothing else happens. That would be the starting point. And then from that framework, you would never have let level of energy usage reach the scale 40:00that it is today. ([Time 0:38:48](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5c0c7b8f680009d4e609))
- > I think there's two things we need to do. One is to realize that the limits to growth was actually correct. If you've seen the work by Graham Turner in Australia, two papers that he's put together 41:00on how well the model fits time. There's Gaya Herrington, who's done work working with one of the major consulting firms. They've both shown that the business as usual or BAE2, which is where you had twice as many resources, or the other one with the technology, those three of the seven runs that they did for the limits to growth study, we are somewhere in the ballpark of all of those, which means a breakdown driven by either excessive pollution, which is the carbon dioxide sort of things or running out of raw materials, which is the declining of energy return on energy investment, 41:30which we're also seeing. That's realistic. Steve Keen: What we're getting out of the climate side is just saying a lot of the potential tipping points that they saw coming forward, are coming forward much more rapidly than they thought. We're losing the Arctic. It's fairly accepted we're not going to have a white Arctic in summer by 2030 or 2040, sometime in that range. All the scientists are saying, "Do not exceed two degrees. Whatever you do for God's sake, don't let the temperature go past two, because at that 42:00point, the tipping points that we know will cause catastrophic change. The climate will be triggered and we'll have forces far beyond what we can deal with." We should be saying to economists, "Okay. Tell us how to finance the sort of very, very immediate attenuation, mitigation change in energy source proposals we need to prevent exceeding 2°C and then tell us what the resource implications are. If we do want to go from a internal combustion engine world to a electric vehicle world, 42:30do we have the resources for it?" Steve Keen: No mainstream economist can answer either of those questions because mainstream economics has ignored the how money is created and live with a toy model of money creation. So they're useless on the issue of government finance and because they've got this non-bio physical model that dominates how they think today, at the heart of all these dynamics, sarcastic general remodels is normally a Cobb-Douglas production function, not something that includes 43:00input-output dynamics and physical inputs and so on. They're useless there too. We've really got to kick them out and ask the heterodox economists and some of the engineers, those questions. That's more important than a new economic model. ([Time 0:40:50](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5c992637480009fc2851))
- > One is that genuine sciences are aware of the limitations of their own knowledge when applied to another field. If you have engineers, they're not about to jump in and tell a chemist how to concoct chemicals in the laboratory or biologists and so on. So there's a level of professional respect for another theory, which means that genuine 44:00scientists don't go and look at economic theory, because they think, "Well, there's things economists know that I don't know. They'll make choices that I can't understand. I'd be an amateur so I keep out of that." Then what it sells to the world is a beautiful vision of capitalism. Steve Keen: Now, it's a completely inappropriate vision of capitalism because if you, as a proverbial alien coming in and taking a look at our society, if you had an alien flying past the planet and taking a good look at capitalism, the last word they'd use to describe it is equilibrium. 44:30It's far from equilibrium. It's changing all the time compared to any other social system. What we've seen is a radical change in the means of production and a radical change in the nature of social relations over time, as well. So far from being an equilibrium dominated society, we're a change dominated society. It's the wrong picture of how our society functions, but what it implies is a perfect world. Steve Keen: If only we can get rid of trade unions, monopolies, 45:00and government, the free market, get rid of all those non-market interventions the market system will reach equilibrium, where we produce the right amount of everything compared to what people's tastes are, where people's maximize their utility subject to their income and where their income is gained by their worthwhile contributions to society, as measured by the marginal product of their social class. It's a vision of harmony. Humans seem incredibly biased towards imagining a perfect world. 45:30Religions talk about a nirvana or a heaven, et cetera, et cetera, neoclassical economists talk about equilibrium now. It's heaven on earth. That is a incredibly seductive vision for our crazy species. ([Time 0:43:41](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5d14de2e040009f7f89d))
- > Credit is change in debt, change in private 52:30debt. Okay? If you look at debt, that's how many dollars you owe. Your credit is how many new dollars you borrow each year. Okay? Mainstream economics ignores that on the basis of what they call the loanable funds model, which says that banks are simply intermediaries between savers and borrowers. If Nate is a saver and Steve is a borrower, then Nate lends to Steve, Nate's spending power goes down, Steve's spending power goes up, one cancels out the other, unless I'm a much more propagate spender than you are. 53:00It all comes down to differing margin propensity to consume. That is the model that they stick with, despite the Bank of England saying back in 2014, "That's not how banks work. Banks are not intermediaries. They're money originators. They create money by creating debt at the same time." Steve Keen: Nate's out of the picture. Steve goes to the bank because he wants to buy a house in Bangkok, borrows a million dollars from a bank. The bank says here's a million dollars to hand over to the owner. You also owe us a million dollars on which we're going to charge you interest. 53:30Okay? But that million dollars is spent by the borrower and becomes part of aggregate demand and aggregate income. Now, I'm using an example of buying a property, but if I shouted you coffee when you were in Amsterdam and I swipe my credit card, then what happens is €7, let's say €10 money is created, which is spent. It's expenditure by me. It's income by the coffee shop owner. The level of debt goes up by €10, which is the increase in my credit card debt. 54:00Steve Keen: The change in debt is literally a one for one contribution to demand right now. Of course, credit can be positive or negative. If you have rising debt, credit is positive and adding to demand. But if you have falling debt, credit is negative and subtracting from demand. That's what caused the financial crisis. That's number one. ([Time 0:52:29](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5f12f88ccb000982de28))
- > I say that credit allows us to consume things we, otherwise, wouldn't have been able to afford to consume and produce things we couldn't have afforded to produce. 55:00We will continue to grow our economy as long as we issue credit in sufficient amounts that we grow our energy. But at some point, this decade, in my opinion, either the financial markets themselves will say, "No más." We won't be able to grow credit. Queue what's happening in Japan right now with JGBs. At some point, the financial markets are going to pull a George Soros versus the Bank of England and say, "Interest rates are going to go up, we can't continue to borrow. 55:30This is untenable." But so far they have taken the neoclassical economist route of all's good, let's continue. It's a belief system. It could last another decade. I don't know. Nate Hagens: But the other side of it is the oil depletion side. If we have Russia, Saudi Arabia, the United States, if that whole thing, A geopolitically changes or B the underlying decline rate of oil in the world is 7%. 56:00We are offsetting that by infill drilling and drilling tertiary wells and drilling new wells, but eventually depletion will win. We're still going to have plenty of oil. From a climate perspective, we could argue we'll have too much oil, but we won't have a hundred million barrels a day at $50, $60 the way that our system has been built on. So I see this divergence growing. ([Time 0:54:45](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed5fd87b8f680009d4e60a))
- > We are running out of easily available energy. The cost of getting energy out of the ground is rising in energy terms. The energy return in energy invested is becoming a serious issue. At the same time, and this is work that's been done by another Australian engineer called Simon Michaux. What we've had is a declining energy return and increasing need for energy to process 57:00minerals, which are lower grade than they were back in the days of cheap oil. That's one of, and cheap coal, that's one of Simon's main points. Putting that all together, we only can produce output if we've got free energy to exploit and easy minerals to mine, and because we're running out of both, we create a crunch point where suddenly that just is not available anymore and then it will not be profitable. Steve Keen: The cost of production are going to rise radically. That'll turn up as inflation in the real world. That's what's happening right now to some large degree, but it's not inflation driven 57:30by wage demands or by profit markups. It's driven by the simply it's costing more and more to actually turn those raw materials and energy into finish goods. That's going to squeeze all the margins, which enable us to have the surplus we live on, workers and capitalists, is that gap between the energy input we need to put in and what we get back out of it, but that squeezes so do living standards. ([Time 0:56:39](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed6023de2e040009f7f89e))
- > if you impose the cost of that on the poor, then you're going to have the gilets jaunes times 10 happening globally because poor people are already finding they can't afford to heat their houses. They've got a choice. Do I heat the house or do I send my kid to school? When you start facing those sorts of choices and then make it even worse than that, you're going to get a revolt of the poor. Poor are the bottom 60 or 70% of population quite feasibly. So the only way this is sustainable is if the cost of adjustment are put on the rich, and that is not exactly how capitalism has functioned. ([Time 1:00:11](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed60c57b8f680009d4e60b))
- > I think we have to find ourselves rationing resources. Effectively, we are in a war. We don't realize that. We're in a war, we are losing, because we're fighting an unbeatable foe, which is the climate of the planet itself. The only way to adjust is that we've got to radically pull ourselves back and stop put pressuring on the climate. Therefore, the only way that can be done without causing complete social breakdown is A, most of the money that enables that is government created, not private debt, because there's no way to profit out of this overall. So the government money creation has to take over and we have to see it as effectively we're rationing resources so that the poor get enough to survive. The rich, get enough to be slightly more affluent than the poor, but the wealth levels and consumption levels they're used to just have to be a thing of the past. ([Time 1:01:02](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed61154fecc70009a2eb00))
- > I'm working on a proposal for a parallel currency system. The idea would be that you would have the normal monetary economy you have right now, but everything would have two prices; a money price, and a carbon price. The carbon price, reflecting the actual carbon content of the good you are purchasing. We'd all get a tradeable carbon credit on a daily basis from the treasury or central bank. We'd have to spend both amounts. Now, of course, because of the skewed nature of the distribution of income, if you gave it out at the average for an economy right now, I wouldn't even bother trying to at the global level, but that's how you ... Global agreements are the way you manage to prevent things being done, they don't actually occur. But do it at the national level so each economy gets ... Steve Keen: Each person, in say America, gets the average carbon credit for America. 95% of Americans would not reach that level of consumption, but the top 5% would. They would need to buy carbon credits off the poor to continue to buy what they're buying. That would be a way of putting enormous pressure to reduce carbon content and a redistribution for the poor, in that sense, through a market mechanism. Whatever we do, it has to provide more of a level of saying ... We have to provide a minimum level of income, a standard living for the vast majority of people, and then the rich have to drop radically. Your idea, taxing everything else, not taxing labor that ends up meaning that the worker gets to keep a hundred percent of what their wage is. That gives them more buying power, anybody buying more extravagant goods, they face the larger cost. Overall, we have to find something where the burden is put on the rich, not the poor. ([Time 1:02:42](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed61874fecc70009a2eb01))
- > The relationship between GDP and CO2 is so much that I say that trying to argue that we need to reduce our emissions is like arguing with a forest fire, because the momentum of economic growth is pulling all energy and materials into the consumption and waste CO2 into the biosphere on the other end. ([Time 1:05:22](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed61c7de2e040009f7f8a0))
- > Nate Hagens: Could we eventually select for physiocrats again, instead of a narcissist and sociopaths? Steve Keen: I think we could, but we have to realize we need be effectively a community of elders, society of experts, making these decisions guided by system software that enables their views to be brought together. That's the vision that I have that I have, which would be functional. You don't want people getting there, because they're narcissists and they can say, "I can lead you to the promised land." We need people who are aware of the complexity of the world in which we live. ([Time 1:12:15](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed63387b8f680009d4e60d))
- > I think the extent to which we have learnt in the last quarter of a millennium is absolutely stunning. I expect to see an enormous number of deaths in the next 80 years, both of humans and other life forms. I see that basically as pretty much inevitable. What I want to have is some capacity to sustain what we've learned through the fossil fuel period. If there's some way that knowledge can be hung onto, then there's a chance for us to build a sustainable, life respecting, civilization on the other side of the catastrophe that I expect us to go through. It would be the greatest tragedy of all, to have learned as much as we know about the universe and then destroy our own society, which enables us to put that knowledge into practice. I care about maintaining that knowledge more than anything else. ([Time 1:12:55](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed635ede2e040009f7f8a1))
- > Nate Hagens: Yeah. What are you specifically most personally concerned about in the coming 10 years or so in the world? Steve Keen: Climate breakdown causing social breakdown, because if we have climate catastrophes, meaning food production collapses, for example, which is potentially ... The Ukraine wars accelerated that in Europe right now. The drought in the western United States, if that extends, of course, to all sides of the wheat belt, then we could have a collapse in food output and therefore, we get a choice of high prices causing starvation, or we go into rationing. Now that could lead, and particularly in as a divisive a society as America, that could lead to just social conflict. The law of the gun comes out as to who gets to eat or attempts to. Of course that would destroy your production and distribution system as well. Steve Keen: I'm worried about the climate breakdown leading to a social breakdown, ending up in a mad max world. In that case, I actually think the most sustainable societies are ones with a more cohesive social system, but also more acceptance of authoritarian control. Because if the Chinese tell the Chinese people, "You've got to ration food," and it applies to everybody and it seemed to apply to everybody, they'll accept it. You tell Americans to ration food, they reach for their revolver. ([Time 1:14:19](https://annotate.tv/watch/62ed51b17ffd5400098a9ec5?annotationId=62ed63ad7b8f680009d4e60f))
