#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/

---

- Technologies encode practices and values into the societies that adopt them. This happens in many ways, often unpredictably and unintentionally, as the second- and third-order effects of technologies. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr9f28m7g89924mksrcmy5n8))
- It could be argued that the ecology of technologies surrounding the smartphone—the smartphone technology ecosystem—has resulted in an epoch-making shift in how humans relate to each other and the world around them. It has changed human behavior and psychology more profoundly in just two decades than perhaps any prior technology (religion, cultural movement, or empire) ever did in an equivalent timeframe. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr9f7t2nbpxma6s6315fjewy))
- Rather than serving primarily in the background for labor or infrastructure, technological advances are in the immediate foreground—in the palm of our hands—central to the most intimate and consequential aspects of our lives, including education, communication, relationships, and politics. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr1gn6g56ebtv6mzntcrk5m3))
- At this point the psychological and cultural effects of widespread, habitual, and nearly non-stop use of these devices has become apparent. Philosophers and public intellectuals are taking for granted the relevance of theorizing about the high-tech future of the smartphone technology ecosystem as an extension and deepening of the human mind[[3]](https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/#fn-3). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr9fjda3g2pzmeyzbhwp6nt1))
- Technologies always create the potential for new forms of behavior, values, and thought, even when the technology is not explicitly made to do so. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0acpth9xm01j42kdqvvrf))
- Instant messaging and “Facetime” have come to replace in-person contact as the default modalities of communication. Easy access to nearly unlimited information also inevitably changes the value we place on skills such as memorization, information recall, and the ability to study and learn from books. A GPS device on your phone is designed to get you where you need to go, and it does that. It was not designed to weaken your sense of direction and make you dependent upon it to feel safe in urban or rural areas. Yet it also does that. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0ck8msj2dbvg05gev4wb6))
- Any new human-made tool has the potential to shape what is considered to be valuable and why. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0dpcyy3g5se3ddvkp5mhv))
- there is a clear correlation between the availability of bathroom scales and increases in cases of anorexia[[5]](https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/#fn-5). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0jv57sxtm11sfskk70tfg))
- The scale increased the salience and visibility of body weight, changing the ways in which it could be valued, thought about, and otherwise related to psychologically. This had unforeseen outcomes. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0kgc2hq0xwwb0re77cwhe))
- Technologies are created with both values and material outcomes in mind. When technologies are brought into the world they create a future: material, social, psychological, and cultural. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0m0af4nnwnc69ca5m6bp2))
- Even a technology as simple as the plow is created with values in mind, such as ease of labor, speed of work, and a desire for food surpluses that create a feeling of safety. It serves these values by affecting material outcomes, such as preparing fields for agriculture. The plow would also lead to urban fortifications for storing and protecting food surpluses, and thus change the nature of human habitats, warfare, and architecture. The plow favors men as farmers due to the upper body strength needed to use it, which changed ideologies about the respective value of the sexes. The plow led eventually to certain forms of animal domestication, in the long run altering the relationship between humans and the natural world, and thus moving religious beliefs from animistic to theocentric. Normalization of animal-drawn plowing as the basis of agriculture made it difficult for humans to value animals as sacred and as equal or surpassing humans in worth. It is hard to worship the sacred spirit of an animal that must be beaten all day to pull a plow. Dominion over animals in this way justified the spread of a cultural narrative that humanity’s role is to control nature, rather than to be a part of nature, which laid the foundations for a mindset that eventually resulted in the industrial revolution. These and countless other changes to human minds, behaviors, and culture followed from the invention of the plow. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0r36hn10rspn0ckjqar8w))
- Technologies co-evolve with value systems—neither determines the other, even though they are intimately related. Whole epochs of civilization, as ways of life and culture, come to be defined by certain sets of technologies and infrastructures. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0rzeejh42c71r79p2nm9m))
- Techno-optimists largely maintain that technology is about what works for everyone—universal functionality—rather than what is good for everyone—universal morality. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0ye3ncxxmcanah994zycp))
- Early modern technologists worked with what might be called **naively optimistic design**: design that assumes positive values are intrinsically associated with all technology-human interfaces. This yielded historically unprecedented technological innovations and a complete restructuring of human life around an expanding stack of increasingly complicated technologies. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5whys1xy9qwmy753bhgvkn))
- The goodness of the technology feels obvious, particularly when the second- and third-order effects that some users may experience only become evident later or in other domains. To many, it appears that the technology itself is not an issue—it is simply up to people to use it responsibly. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc10ky3a7e8fmxhtd7ht05j))
- *Luddite* approaches often looked backward, trying to rescue forms of life that were being overthrown by a range of technological encroachments. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wk974m7fysan6qg33rtn1))
- In time, this kind of thinking became self-evidently inadequate as a response to techno-optimism, as new technologies tend to confer power to those that adopt them. Any worldview that makes the conscious decision to opt out of adopting new technologies becomes increasingly disempowered. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wm5ph8jpmmcqwkmg9z214))
- As modernity advanced, science gained in power, and technological innovations increased, there arose a form of ***nihilistic design***: design that effectively ignores value as an aspect of technology-human interfaces. This approach might also be called *values agnostic design*. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wsp1rqtgk8z5akdqtr19s))
- The philosopher of technology, Langdon Winner, described aspects of this view in what he called the “Technological Orthodoxy.” ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wqv3xbtw2svvy98g9p68t))
- “Technological orthodoxy” entails a strict separation of values from technology. In part, this is related to understanding value itself as primarily socially constructed. This idea began with modernist scientific materialism. The assumption that physical matter constitutes all that exists leaves no room for “subjective qualities” such as value. This idea—that value is purely subjective—reached its climax with postmodernist expressions of skepticism towards all universal frameworks of value. The result has been a progressive deepening of the separation of technology design from considerations of value. Thinking about design in this way leads innovators to “move fast and break things” and focus effort on “disruptive” technologies. Whereas naively optimistic design made the assumption that technology could advance sacrosanct values, nihilistic design decoupled technological innovation from any serious considerations about value at all. The consequences of this approach are likely to be both far-reaching and difficult to understand completely. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wvy70yhj7dpzq0vpyqkct))
- As a way forward, we propose here a form of ***axiological design***: design that factors and leverages the intrinsic values inevitably encoded in all technology-human interfaces. This is design that acknowledges that in addition to whatever its physical impacts, it is also affecting the behaviors and thus the psychology of the people using it (and with proliferation, the society as a whole). As such, technological innovations must have design goals and constraints related to the psychological and sociological effects as core elements of the design process. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wxt1qy9j0cze896tca5az))
- Technologies are created and evolve together to form whole civilizations (see Box 1). It is important not to consider any technology as existing all by itself. Humans have come to live in massive networks of operationally related technologies, which have come to form whole ecologies and infrastructures supporting every aspect of conscious experience. Ultimately, this new human reality constitutes a technological epoch with distinct material characteristics and societal dynamics. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grerb4va6b3p2cvw2rpnjp6r))
- Instead of assuming technology is either good or bad by definition, technology should be understood as intrinsically value laden and value creating. All technologies are created with the actualization of certain values as a goal; they are embedded with values from the start. As technologies take hold and proliferate, they should be understood also to have the potential for forming new, unknown, and unpredictable values. Technologies are both encoded forms of human values and at the same time encode potential and unknowable new values, for better and for worse. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wzj2bzejktwf8v16af2zx))
- Technologists have promoted a range of overlapping approaches including (but not limited to) user-centered design, usable design, human-centered design, value-sensitive design, worth-centered design, ontological design, and more.[[10]](https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/#fn-10) Some of the insights and conclusions from these fields are summarized in the following five propositions about technology: ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5xb2709sw1hs245adpz9c4))
- • Technology is created in pursuit of values, and results in the creation and transformation of values.
  • Technology requires the creation of more and different technology; multiple new technologies evolve together as functionally bound sets, forming evolving ecologies of technologies.
  • Technology shapes our bodies and movements as a human-created habitat, and thus is deeply habit forming, both for individuals and societies.
  • Technology changes the nature of power dynamics in unpredictable ways, creating an environment that advantages some humans over others, setting up selection pressures that force personal adaptation to and adoption of new technologies.
  • Technology impacts the kinds of ideas we value, the quality of attention we pay, and our conceptions of self and world. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5xb7etw5qh9pj8zy7gtpkk))
- Technology is value-loaded: it comes with values built in. It is also values altering: technologies change and augment existing value systems. These two dynamics are related but not deterministic. We saw this above with the example of the smartphone and the plow. It is quite common that the values guiding the design of a technology are different from the value system changes that result from its widespread use. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbs6c78tbyf2rdvq1dszqpr))
- A vast array of related technologies eventually become the background suppositions of a society—its most basic infrastructures—constituting a technological epoch, or a fundamentally new kind of human-created habitat. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbsahqztb3gfsgr3tp5vkgb))
- This means that humans can adapt to unique and challenging environmental conditions in ways that other animals cannot, while at the same time humans are able to shape and create unique environmental conditions to fit our needs and values. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbsesqqca48bepeg6ccbnj4))
- A new technology affects existing practices of human competition and cooperation, and sets new selection pressures that confer advantage to early adopters of the technology. New technologies themselves become uniquely valuable insofar as they confer advantage. Use of the new technology therefore becomes effectively obligatory, as failure to make use of it results in the loss of competitive advantage. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbskeqefrqvjeknwzm4kc9a))
- Sometimes, adopting a new technology becomes basically obligatory. Technology creates a need for itself; it makes itself valuable. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbsp53rfs2n5qn87ez60j0s))
- Our most prominent technologies tend to shape the metaphors we use to explain the world. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbsws8ekenrz4zp2n1a0jmg))
- Second- and third-order effects on values, culture, power, and personality must be given due consideration. We can no longer limit ourselves to thinking only about the impacts across material economies, finance, and ecology. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbsy97ffkze9tffbmb69692))
- Technology is intrinsic to our being and becoming as individuals and social systems. The rapid emergence and saturation of digital technologies—largely based upon fast-paced nihilistic design—has resulted in what might be called an *accidental planetary computational stack.*[[15]](https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/#fn-15) This means that the technological environments we find ourselves in, with their visible and invisible effects on our bodies, minds, cultures, societies, and ecosystems, did not result from design. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbt0mwkbcs0pktxc53xwe67))
- technologists should hold ethics as the fundamental priority in the design process, with engineering following its lead. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbt82xyfyv2vr1h8ccqnp5z))
- Finally, we must seek to clarify the fundamentals of human value systems. It is vital that we factor how psychological processes work in conjunction with technology to change human meaning-making and valuing. Preferable futures require a return to considerations of human nature and conditioning, and how the two interact to influence behavior and thus the experience of being human. These human-making dynamics are an unavoidable part of the consequences that flow from all innovations. As we have developed incredible new capacities, our history of naive and now nihilistic design has driven civilization into a massively complicated bottleneck of existential consequence. Existing ecologies of technologies and infrastructures must be judged by their effects on bodies, minds, families, cultures, and the environment. Future technologies must be designed according to methods that take human value and experience seriously enough to be constrained by their limits—such as sanity, dignity, and justice. The dangerous reign of nihilistic design must end if our civilization is not to. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gsbth7dyht46vsjz5hgnys8t))
