#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://youtube.com/watch?v=vlPhAFixBL4

---

- > what I'm trying to describe here is what I think is the next stage of this, which is a war on the fundamentals of everything in our society. A war on our history, a war on our past, a war on our foundations, a war on our culture, 07:00and a war on the people in the culture. ([Time 0:06:42](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0bc44e2ae2900096f83ff))
- > one of the disappointments in my life has been the, I made the presumption of people in politics are interested in truth. - Yeah, (laughs) - That's not the case. - You're not 22 anymore, are you Douglas? - Its not the case. They're interested in achieving and retaining power ([Time 0:13:32](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0bcfa8384d70009772463))
- > The race chapter, the death of George Floyd, the summer of George Floyd riots. The, if you look at the, I mean, we were all, it's always worth reminding ourselves in, in most countries at that point, we were made to seclude ourselves in the months before that happened, people were literally isolated and told by government to isolate. And one of the things that did to us, I believe is that it took away our societal antenna. If we meet people, if we meet strangers, 16:00friends and everything, we sit around a dinner table, stand a bar, you try things out and you row about things and you discuss things and you josh about things, and much more if you remove all of that and then something terrible happens, and a group of very dedicated people say that shows X is the case. Then people start to think, maybe that is the case. ([Time 0:15:30](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0bd78b7ae920009521cf8))
- > So you're dealing with a completely grotesque distorted picture of the present that people in America and then around the world have been persuaded to fall for, and that has consequences 18:30because if you are told that this is the case and that you live in a society that's racist, then you bring up White people to believe that they are somehow contaminated from birth. You bring up young Black kids to believe that they are able to be hunted down and killed in America by the state. You massively exacerbate all racial differences. But what this has fallen into has been this, not just what I described as war on White people, but this set of massive overreach claims 19:00about what is underneath this, well we've always been like this, you know? And so we have the starting of the rewriting, of our history in the name of racial justice and social justice, in America you have a 1619 project, no small thing it's the New York Times that rolls that out, led by non historian non-specialists who make totally verifiably false claims about the foundations of this country. ([Time 0:18:16](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0bdbab7ae920009521cf9))
- > So we have been embedding totally false claims about our collective pasts in the names, of trying to refine the present. ([Time 0:20:09](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0bdcab7ae920009521cfa))
- > I think in a way this is because politics has become a kind of hobby, it's more than a hobby, a hobby and then something more for a lot people, it's carrying an awful lot of weight. ([Time 0:24:51](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0be32b7ae920009521cfb))
- > one of the questions that's now coming up again is reparations. Britain by the way paid significant reparations when the slave trade ended. In fact, there's evidence, I analyze explain it in the book that Britain actually paid 36:30more to abolish the slave trade than ever gained through the slave trade. ([Time 0:36:14](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0bf9870afb80009901b2d))
- > And I think a number of times in the book, I use a couple of fantastic quotes of, 38:00Nietzsche from on the "Genealogy of Morals." And one of his analogies, which I lift is he talks of people who, pick at long closed wounds and pick off the scabs and then scream about how much they've been hurt. This is horribly pertinent. I think that's what we're dealing with, we're dealing with people today who are demanding money, for things they didn't suffer. And demanding money from people who did no wrong. ([Time 0:37:52](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c013f86d450009d5cfd2))
- > this a new generation has been persuaded to open a wound, they didn't suffer from and scream about how much they've suffered. And you know there's actually, this is why I do this sub chapter on reparations is that there's a deep moral question within this, which is at this stage, it's people who look like people to whom wrong things were done in the past, 39:30demanding money from people who look like people who could have done the wrong things. ([Time 0:39:11](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c055e2ae2900096f8400))
- > What do you do by, I mean, this is one of the many moral problems is I don't believe that anyone living has the right to be forgiven and no one living has the right to forgive. 40:00They don't have the right, and I explain why in the book that simply in Maltum you do not have the right to apologize for something you did not do, and nobody else has the right to accept an apology if the wrong was not done to them. So we are in this set of demands that are being made, which I'm afraid must be dismissed carefully, sensitively at times and insensitively at others. 40:30But it's not going to work, and this idea has to be put to bed because we are now dealing with historic retribution, not just reparations, but historic retribution. ([Time 0:39:48](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c06bf86d450009d5cfd3))
- > racism and colonialism and slavery were part of the story of the West as they have been the part of the story of all societies throughout human history and in many societies today, but they are not the history of the West. They are part of the history. They are not the history of the West. And that has been totally misrepresented in our day. As if these sins were the only thing that defined us, 44:30well actually what defined the West was that these were things we recognized to be sins. Modern China doesn't recognize that, and many other nations and countries and societies around the world, don't recognize that. ([Time 0:44:08](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c0b8e2ae2900096f8401))
- > the war on the West, is a war on all of the things we treasure. designed to leave behind only people who very militant political activists want to leave standing as the only people with an explanation for our society. ([Time 0:50:39](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c2d3d6ac900009c950b8))
- > Nietzsche again, writes about this, the problem with resentment, the problem with resentful people is that there is actually only one true answer you can have to them to stop their resentment, which is to say to them, you are right. There is something which is wrecking your life, and is ruining you. The thing is you, you are the thing. Now, the problem with that is that the last message 54:30anyone wants to hear. And so there will always be an inbuilt reason for resentful people to stop ever looking inwards. ([Time 0:54:00](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c38ed6ac900009c950b9))
- > The only counter to real resentment is gratitude is to turn your attitude towards life around and being encouraged to do so, now this is perfectly possible but, 55:30and one of the things is to realize what a life of resentment actually looks like. Dostoevsky, "The brothers Karamazov." Has a fantastic passage where the devil appears and says to one of the brothers, the one the brother he says to one of the brothers that gratitude something he can't do. And when I read that first, I thought that is amazing. ([Time 0:55:19](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c3bfd6ac900009c950ba))
- > in the end of his series on civilization, Lord Clark memorably said that courtesy was one of the things that defined the West, its a very interesting thing to fall on at the end of this thing, but courtesy is a hugely important thing in Western society, but it's not endless. ([Time 1:04:10](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c47c8384d70009772465))
- > So the not courteous thing would be us saying we've been courteous for an awfully long time and we're gonna stop because it seems not to be doing us much good. So we will pursue truth wherever we want to pursue it for whatever means we have and whatever disciplines we have. And we will stop pretending that alongside all the great philosophy of the West native American philosophy is equal. ([Time 1:05:18](https://annotate.tv/watch/62e0b3250cc43200098e860e?annotationId=62e0c49e0c76990009c91a56))
