#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://youtube.com/watch?v=OL8DyVusLeE

---

- > the vision of a meaning ahead of someone, a meaning in wait for someone to be fulfilled by someone, that this contributes most than anything else under equal other circumstances for survival. ([Time 0:00:22](https://annotate.tv/watch/633fd153a917fd000954bd2e?annotationId=634050511c298a000a3f4620))
- > this void manifests itself as in apathy in boredom, lack of initiative, lack of interest - interest in the world or initiative in changing something within the world for the better. This frustration is a a proof of the existence of a will to meaning. Unless we were imbued by a will to meaning by the wish to find meaning and discuss discover and fulfill meaning in life we never would be able to experience an inner void so this is in a way also something positive. ([Time 0:03:43](https://annotate.tv/watch/633fd153a917fd000954bd2e?annotationId=6340513869b0930009e7dd79))
- > You may find a meaning the "average" man, the man on the street or the woman on the street may find a meaning day by day in doing a deed in creating a work and - that's the creative - creative and in experiencing something. The beauty. The truth as a researcher, or the good in dealing with people as a teacher or whatsoever. ([Time 0:04:35](https://annotate.tv/watch/633fd153a917fd000954bd2e?annotationId=6340517e1c86cf00093f5ba7))
- > this is a paradigm of experiential values, of finding a meaning in experiencing without doing anything without achieving or accomplishing anything but just in giving oneself the immediate experience of something say beautiful going on in the world. This is the second avenue but there is also another aspect of experiential values. Excuse me, not only experiencing something but also experiencing someone. More than that, experiencing another human being in his or her very uniqueness and it is the main attribute of a human being that he is a person in contrast to any animal he is a person a person is always something absolutely unique irreparable in the evolution of the cosmos as is we are incomparable with any other human being and this uniqueness can be got hold of solely by a loving person, Because he not only sees the essence but also the potentials in the beloved person thereby as I put it before promoting him alleviating it to reach out to attain this potential and to fulfill and thereby actualize also himself but not by preaching self-actualization. It's nonsense self-actualization can only fall into your lap automatically once that you have fulfilled a concrete meaning, done the best of a situation. Then you actualize yourself as a by-product. ([Time 0:05:19](https://annotate.tv/watch/633fd153a917fd000954bd2e?annotationId=634051e469b0930009e7dd7b))
- > If there is no possibility in a given situation to fulfill the meaning of a situation by giving oneself to the experience of beauty and so forth. Nor if you have lost the capability to do your job to do your work even then there is an ultimate possibility to find and fulfill meaning - not only the ultimate it is even the potential to fulfill the deepest meaning, to attain the highest values: by your approach to the given situation, a tragic or trist situation confronting you. ([Time 0:07:23](https://annotate.tv/watch/633fd153a917fd000954bd2e?annotationId=6340521c69b0930009e7de46))
- > You stand there, you stood there naked with nothing you could have had but all the more what counted and the mattered was what you were - "being" rather than "having", possessing anything. So what counted was what you make out of this situation, what attitude you adopt in the given situation and there is a multitude a wealth of possible attitudes to how to approach it. So we have to decide. ([Time 0:08:41](https://annotate.tv/watch/633fd153a917fd000954bd2e?annotationId=634052661c298a000a3f4622))
- > Now I'm convinced that in contrast to the usual aspect or be it sound aspect to life and more specifically to the past, to life's transitoriness and this includes that we approach, each of us are approaching death, in contrast to that I maintain that in the past nothing is lost but right on the contrary everything is stored forever. It is not annihilated by transitoriness but on the contrary it has been, it is becoming preserved forever. Something you have done can never be undone. Something you have experienced something you have even experienced in a negative sense going through suffering and if for instance you suffered, gone through this suffering honestly courageously and with dignity who in the world, what what in the world can deny it, can annihilate this? What you have done has been done forever in both ways in a negative as in a positive way, it cannot be undone. And the past is a storehouse of what you have done what you have experienced what you have gone through and what you have done out of all the negative and tragic aspects as even encountered within your life. ([Time 0:09:51](https://annotate.tv/watch/633fd153a917fd000954bd2e?annotationId=634052d14081230009164378))
