#🗃/🟥 
ref: 
https://youtube.com/watch?v=N-yALPEpV4w

---

- > So first of all, the electricity from solar rooftops ends up costing about twice as much as the electricity from solar farms. And both solar farms and wind farms require covering a pretty significant amount of land with solar panels and wind turbines and also building very big transmission lines to bring all that electricity from the countryside into the city. Both of those things were often very strongly resisted by local communities, as well as by conservation biologists who were concerned about the impacts on wild-bird species and other animals. ([Time 0:01:57](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b325c0b995060008e9d309))
- > What do kill eagles and other big birds, like this kite as well as owls and condors and other threatened and endangered species, are wind turbines; in fact, they're one of the most significant threats to those big bird species that we have. We just haven't been introducing the airspace with many other objects like we have wind turbines over the last several years. ([Time 0:04:45](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b325f2bed4e300082d7ffe))
- > And in terms of solar, you know, building a solar farm is a lot like building any other kind of farm: you have to clear the whole area of wildlife. So this is a picture of one third of one of the biggest solar farms in California, called Ivanpah. In order to build this, they had to clear the whole area of desert tortoises, literally pulling desert tortoises and their babies out of burrows, putting them on the back of pickup trucks, and transporting them to captivity, where many of them ended up dying. ([Time 0:05:07](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b325fcb995060008e9d30a))
- > Over time, it gradually struck me that there was really no amount of technological innovation that was going to make the sun shine more regularly or wind blow more reliably; in fact, you could make solar panels cheaper, and you could make wind turbines bigger, but sunlight and wind are just really dilute fuels, and in order to produce significant amounts of electricity, you just have to cover a very large land mass with them. In other words, all of the major problems with renewables aren't technical, they're natural. ([Time 0:05:46](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b3260ab995060008e9d30b))
- > Had Germany spent 580 billion dollars on nuclear instead of renewables, it would already be getting a hundred percent of its electricity from clean energy sources, and all of its transportation energy. ([Time 0:08:12](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b3262bb995060008e9d30c))
- > This is just the most recent study, that was done by the prestigious British medical journal Lancet, finds that nuclear power is the safest. It's easy to understand why. According to the WHO, about 7 million people die annually from air pollution. And nuclear plants don't emit that. As a result, the climate scientist James Hansen looked at it. He calculated that nuclear power has already saved almost two million lives to date. ([Time 0:08:38](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b3263945dfab0009e16e01))
- > Nuclear waste is actually the only waste from electricity production that's safely contained and internalized. Every other way of making electricity emits that waste into the natural environment, either as pollution or as material waste. ([Time 0:10:35](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b32667bed4e300082d7fff))
- > We tend to think of solar panels as clean, but the truth is that there is no plan to deal with solar panels at the end of their 20 or 25-year life. A lot of experts are actually very concerned that solar panels are just going to be shipped to poor countries in Africa or Asia, with the rest of our electronic-waste stream, to be disassembled, often exposing people to really high level of toxic elements, including lead, cadmium and chromium, elements that because they're elements, their toxicity never declines over time. ([Time 0:10:49](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b32670a851dc00096d9757))
- > I think it's natural that those of us that became very concerned about climate change, such a big environmental issue, would gravitate towards really romantic solutions like harmonizing human civilization with the natural world using renewable energies. But I think it's also understandable that as the facts have come in, many of us have started to question our prior beliefs and change our minds. For me the question now is, Now that we know that renewables can't save the planet, are we going to keep letting them destroy it? ([Time 0:16:46](https://annotate.tv/watch/62b3258cb995060008e9d308?annotationId=62b326ccbed4e300082d8000))
