tags: #🗃/🟥 
aliases: 
ref: 
https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/

---

- Rather than serving primarily in the background for labor or infrastructure, technological advances are in the immediate foreground—in the palm of our hands—central to the most intimate and consequential aspects of our lives, including education, communication, relationships, and politics. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr1gn6g56ebtv6mzntcrk5m3))
- The products and services of the modern digital economy continue to bring technology ever closer to the core of the human experience—and “the digital age” is just getting started. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr1gnj12cws5nxfawdhx84zr))
- Technologies encode practices and values into the societies that adopt them. This happens in many ways, often unpredictably and unintentionally, as the second- and third-order effects of technologies. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr9f28m7g89924mksrcmy5n8))
- It could be argued that the ecology of technologies surrounding the smartphone—the smartphone technology ecosystem—has resulted in an epoch-making shift in how humans relate to each other and the world around them. It has changed human behavior and psychology more profoundly in just two decades than perhaps any prior technology (religion, cultural movement, or empire) ever did in an equivalent timeframe. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr9f7t2nbpxma6s6315fjewy))
- At this point the psychological and cultural effects of widespread, habitual, and nearly non-stop use of these devices has become apparent. Philosophers and public intellectuals are taking for granted the relevance of theorizing about the high-tech future of the smartphone technology ecosystem as an extension and deepening of the human mind[[3]](https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/#fn-3). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gr9fjda3g2pzmeyzbhwp6nt1))
- Technologies always create the potential for new forms of behavior, values, and thought, even when the technology is not explicitly made to do so. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0acpth9xm01j42kdqvvrf))
- Instant messaging and “Facetime” have come to replace in-person contact as the default modalities of communication. Easy access to nearly unlimited information also inevitably changes the value we place on skills such as memorization, information recall, and the ability to study and learn from books. A GPS device on your phone is designed to get you where you need to go, and it does that. It was not designed to weaken your sense of direction and make you dependent upon it to feel safe in urban or rural areas. Yet it also does that. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0ck8msj2dbvg05gev4wb6))
- Any new human-made tool has the potential to shape what is considered to be valuable and why. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0dpcyy3g5se3ddvkp5mhv))
- there is a clear correlation between the availability of bathroom scales and increases in cases of anorexia[[5]](https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/#fn-5). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0jv57sxtm11sfskk70tfg))
- The scale increased the salience and visibility of body weight, changing the ways in which it could be valued, thought about, and otherwise related to psychologically. This had unforeseen outcomes. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0kgc2hq0xwwb0re77cwhe))
- Technologies are created with both values and material outcomes in mind. When technologies are brought into the world they create a future: material, social, psychological, and cultural. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0m0af4nnwnc69ca5m6bp2))
- Even a technology as simple as the plow is created with values in mind, such as ease of labor, speed of work, and a desire for food surpluses that create a feeling of safety. It serves these values by affecting material outcomes, such as preparing fields for agriculture. The plow would also lead to urban fortifications for storing and protecting food surpluses, and thus change the nature of human habitats, warfare, and architecture. The plow favors men as farmers due to the upper body strength needed to use it, which changed ideologies about the respective value of the sexes. The plow led eventually to certain forms of animal domestication, in the long run altering the relationship between humans and the natural world, and thus moving religious beliefs from animistic to theocentric. Normalization of animal-drawn plowing as the basis of agriculture made it difficult for humans to value animals as sacred and as equal or surpassing humans in worth. It is hard to worship the sacred spirit of an animal that must be beaten all day to pull a plow. Dominion over animals in this way justified the spread of a cultural narrative that humanity’s role is to control nature, rather than to be a part of nature, which laid the foundations for a mindset that eventually resulted in the industrial revolution. These and countless other changes to human minds, behaviors, and culture followed from the invention of the plow. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0r36hn10rspn0ckjqar8w))
- Technologies co-evolve with value systems—neither determines the other, even though they are intimately related. Whole epochs of civilization, as ways of life and culture, come to be defined by certain sets of technologies and infrastructures. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0rzeejh42c71r79p2nm9m))
- Techno-optimists largely maintain that technology is about what works for everyone—universal functionality—rather than what is good for everyone—universal morality. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc0ye3ncxxmcanah994zycp))
- The goodness of the technology feels obvious, particularly when the second- and third-order effects that some users may experience only become evident later or in other domains. To many, it appears that the technology itself is not an issue—it is simply up to people to use it responsibly. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grc10ky3a7e8fmxhtd7ht05j))
- Technologies are created and evolve together to form whole civilizations (see Box 1). It is important not to consider any technology as existing all by itself. Humans have come to live in massive networks of operationally related technologies, which have come to form whole ecologies and infrastructures supporting every aspect of conscious experience. Ultimately, this new human reality constitutes a technological epoch with distinct material characteristics and societal dynamics. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01grerb4va6b3p2cvw2rpnjp6r))
## New highlights added February 15, 2023 at 12:19 PM
- Early modern technologists worked with what might be called **naively optimistic design**: design that assumes positive values are intrinsically associated with all technology-human interfaces. This yielded historically unprecedented technological innovations and a complete restructuring of human life around an expanding stack of increasingly complicated technologies. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5whys1xy9qwmy753bhgvkn))
- *Luddite* approaches often looked backward, trying to rescue forms of life that were being overthrown by a range of technological encroachments. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wk974m7fysan6qg33rtn1))
- In time, this kind of thinking became self-evidently inadequate as a response to techno-optimism, as new technologies tend to confer power to those that adopt them. Any worldview that makes the conscious decision to opt out of adopting new technologies becomes increasingly disempowered. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wm5ph8jpmmcqwkmg9z214))
- As modernity advanced, science gained in power, and technological innovations increased, there arose a form of ***nihilistic design***: design that effectively ignores value as an aspect of technology-human interfaces. This approach might also be called *values agnostic design*. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wsp1rqtgk8z5akdqtr19s))
- The philosopher of technology, Langdon Winner, described aspects of this view in what he called the “Technological Orthodoxy.” ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wqv3xbtw2svvy98g9p68t))
- “Technological orthodoxy” entails a strict separation of values from technology. In part, this is related to understanding value itself as primarily socially constructed. This idea began with modernist scientific materialism. The assumption that physical matter constitutes all that exists leaves no room for “subjective qualities” such as value. This idea—that value is purely subjective—reached its climax with postmodernist expressions of skepticism towards all universal frameworks of value. The result has been a progressive deepening of the separation of technology design from considerations of value. Thinking about design in this way leads innovators to “move fast and break things” and focus effort on “disruptive” technologies. Whereas naively optimistic design made the assumption that technology could advance sacrosanct values, nihilistic design decoupled technological innovation from any serious considerations about value at all. The consequences of this approach are likely to be both far-reaching and difficult to understand completely. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wvy70yhj7dpzq0vpyqkct))
- As a way forward, we propose here a form of ***axiological design***: design that factors and leverages the intrinsic values inevitably encoded in all technology-human interfaces. This is design that acknowledges that in addition to whatever its physical impacts, it is also affecting the behaviors and thus the psychology of the people using it (and with proliferation, the society as a whole). As such, technological innovations must have design goals and constraints related to the psychological and sociological effects as core elements of the design process. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wxt1qy9j0cze896tca5az))
- Instead of assuming technology is either good or bad by definition, technology should be understood as intrinsically value laden and value creating. All technologies are created with the actualization of certain values as a goal; they are embedded with values from the start. As technologies take hold and proliferate, they should be understood also to have the potential for forming new, unknown, and unpredictable values. Technologies are both encoded forms of human values and at the same time encode potential and unknowable new values, for better and for worse. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5wzj2bzejktwf8v16af2zx))
- Technologists have promoted a range of overlapping approaches including (but not limited to) user-centered design, usable design, human-centered design, value-sensitive design, worth-centered design, ontological design, and more.[[10]](https://consilienceproject.org/technology-is-not-values-neutral/#fn-10) Some of the insights and conclusions from these fields are summarized in the following five propositions about technology: ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5xb2709sw1hs245adpz9c4))
- • Technology is created in pursuit of values, and results in the creation and transformation of values.
  • Technology requires the creation of more and different technology; multiple new technologies evolve together as functionally bound sets, forming evolving ecologies of technologies.
  • Technology shapes our bodies and movements as a human-created habitat, and thus is deeply habit forming, both for individuals and societies.
  • Technology changes the nature of power dynamics in unpredictable ways, creating an environment that advantages some humans over others, setting up selection pressures that force personal adaptation to and adoption of new technologies.
  • Technology impacts the kinds of ideas we value, the quality of attention we pay, and our conceptions of self and world. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gs5xb7etw5qh9pj8zy7gtpkk))
